New how-to guide: create a UDF (#5715)
confluentinc/ksql: docs/how-to-guides/create-a-user-defined-function.md

# How to create a user-defined function

## Context

You have a piece of logic for transforming or aggregating events that ksqlDB can't currently express. You want to extend ksqlDB to apply that logic in your queries. To do that, ksqlDB exposes hooks through Java programs. This functionality is broadly called *user-defined functions*, or UDFs for short.

## In action

```java
package my.example;

import io.confluent.ksql.function.udf.Udf;
import io.confluent.ksql.function.udf.UdfDescription;
import io.confluent.ksql.function.udf.UdfParameter;

import org.apache.kafka.common.Configurable;

import java.util.Map;

@UdfDescription(name = "formula",
                author = "example user",
                version = "1.0.2",
                description = "A custom formula for important business logic.")
public class FormulaUdf implements Configurable {

    private int baseValue;

    @Override

>     public void configure(final Map<String, ?> map) {

Author: Yeah, you're probably right. I wanted each example to show a bunch of different features, but I also just copied the first example to the top. I'll strip it down more.

        String s = (String) map.get("ksql.functions.formula.base.value");
        baseValue = Integer.parseInt(s);
    }

    @Udf(description = "The standard version of the formula with integer parameters.")
    public long formula(@UdfParameter(value = "a") int v1, @UdfParameter(value = "b") int v2) {
        return (v1 * v2) + baseValue;
    }

    @Udf(description = "A special variant of the formula, handling double parameters.")
    public long formula(@UdfParameter(value = "a") double v1, @UdfParameter(value = "b") double v2) {
        return ((int) (Math.ceil(v1) * Math.ceil(v2))) + baseValue;
    }

}
```

## Set up a Java project

> To implement a user-defined function, the first thing that you need to do is create a Java project with a dependency on ksqlDB's UDF library. This library contains the annotations you'll use to signal that the classes you're implementing aren't just any old classes, they're UDFs. You can manage your Java project with any build tool, but this guide demonstrates how it works with Gradle. In the end, all that matters is that you're able to put an uberjar in ksqlDB's extension directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To implement a user-defined function, start by creating a Java project with a dependency on ksqlDB's UDF library. This library contains the annotations you use to signal that the classes you're implementing are UDFs specifically. You can manage your Java project with any build tool, but this guide demonstrates how it works with Gradle. What matters is that you can put an uberjar in ksqlDB's extension directory.
```

In a fresh directory, create the following `build.gradle` file to set up the Java project:

> ```

Author: Updated to give it a mention. I'd like to be more explicit with how this is all set up to demystify it.

buildscript {
    repositories {
        jcenter()
    }
}

plugins {
    id "java"
    id "com.github.johnrengelman.shadow" version "6.0.0"
}

sourceCompatibility = "1.8"
targetCompatibility = "1.8"
version = "0.0.1"

repositories {
    mavenCentral()
    jcenter()

    maven {
        url "http://packages.confluent.io/maven"
    }
}

dependencies {
    compile "io.confluent.ksql:ksqldb-udf:{{ site.cprelease }}"
    compile "org.apache.kafka:kafka_2.13:2.5.0"
    compile "org.apache.kafka:connect-api:2.5.0"
}

apply plugin: "com.github.johnrengelman.shadow"
apply plugin: "java"

shadowJar {
    archiveBaseName = "example-udfs"
    archiveClassifier = ""
    destinationDir = file("extensions")
}
```

> Dependencies are also declared on `kafka` and `connect-api`. You'll want both of these dependencies if you plan on making your UDFs capable of being externally configured or able to handle structs. This guide does both of those things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dependencies are also declared on `kafka` and `connect-api`. You need both of these dependencies to make your UDFs capable of being externally configured or able to handle structs. This guide does both of those things.
```

## Implement the classes

> There are three kinds of UDFs which manipulate rows in different ways: scalar functions, tabular functions, and aggregation functions. Each is demonstrated below with simple examples using a variety of features (you can learn about more sophisticated usage in the [concepts section](../concepts/functions.md)). Start by creating a directory to house the class files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three kinds of UDFs which manipulate rows in different ways: scalar functions, tabular functions, and aggregation functions. Each is demonstrated below with simple examples using a variety of features. You can learn about more sophisticated usage in the [concepts section](../concepts/functions.md)).

Start by creating a directory for the class files:
```

```
mkdir -p src/main/java/com/example
```

### Scalar functions

> A scalar function (UDF for short) consumes one row as input and produces one row as output. Use this when you simply want to transform a value.

Author: Will save that for the reference section.

Create a file at `src/main/java/com/example/FormulaUdf.java` and populate it with the following code. This UDF takes two parameters and executes a simple formula.

```java
package my.example;

import io.confluent.ksql.function.udf.Udf;
import io.confluent.ksql.function.udf.UdfDescription;
import io.confluent.ksql.function.udf.UdfParameter;

import org.apache.kafka.common.Configurable;

import java.util.Map;

@UdfDescription(name = "formula",
                author = "example user",
                version = "1.0.2",
                description = "A custom formula for important business logic.")
public class FormulaUdf implements Configurable {

    private int baseValue;

    @Override
    public void configure(final Map<String, ?> map) {
        String s = (String) map.get("ksql.functions.formula.base.value");
        baseValue = Integer.parseInt(s);
    }

    @Udf(description = "The standard version of the formula with integer parameters.")

>     public long formula(@UdfParameter(value = "a") int v1, @UdfParameter(value = "b") int v2) {

Author: Today I learned. :) Updated.

    public long formula(@UdfParameter(value = "a") double v1, @UdfParameter(value = "b") double v2) {
        return ((int) (Math.ceil(v1) * Math.ceil(v2))) + baseValue;
    }

}
```

Some important points to notice:

- The `@UdfDescription` annotation marks the class as a scalar UDF. The `name` parameter gives the function a name so you can refer to it in SQL.

- The `@Udf` annotation marks a method as a body of code to invoke when the function is called. Because ksqlDB is strongly typed, you need to supply multiple signatures if you want your function to work with different column types. This UDF has two signatures: one that takes integer parameters and another that takes doubles.

- The `@UdfParameter` annotation lets you give the function parameters names. These are rendered when using the `DESCRIBE` statement on a function.

- This UDF uses an external parameter, `ksql.functions.formula.base.value`. When a UDF implements the `Configurable` interface, it will be invoked once as the server starts up. `configure()` supplies a map of the parameters that ksqlDB server was started with. You will see how this value is populated later in the guide.

!!! warning

>     External parameters do not yet work for tabular or aggregation functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    External parameters aren't supported for tabular or aggregation functions.
```

>     Support for these function types will be added soon.

Reviewer: In general, we try not to make promises about future features in docs.

>     Support for these function types will be added soon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Either continue following this guide by implementing more functions or skip ahead to [compiling the classes](#add-the-uberjar-to-the-classpath) so you can use the functions in ksqlDB.

### Tabular functions

A tabular function (UDTF for short) takes one row as input and produces zero or more rows as output. This is sometimes called "flat map" or "mapcat" in different programming languages. Use this when a value represents many smaller values and needs to be "exploded" into its individual parts to be useful.

Create a file at `src/main/java/com/example/IndexSequenceUdtf.java` and populate it with the following code. This UDTF takes one parameter as input, an array of any type, and returns a sequence of rows, where each element is the element in the array concatenated with its index position as a string.

```java
package my.example;

import io.confluent.ksql.function.udtf.Udtf;
import io.confluent.ksql.function.udtf.UdtfDescription;
import io.confluent.ksql.function.udf.UdfParameter;

import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.List;

@UdtfDescription(name = "index_seq",
                 author = "example user",

>                  version = "1.5.0",

Author: It seems like it might be useful in practice so I figured I'd add it in. I'll call it out the first time it's used so that it doesn't look arbitrary or magical.

                 description = "Disassembles a sequence and produces new elements concatenated with indices.")
public class IndexSequenceUdtf {

    private final String DELIMITER = "-";

    @Udtf(description = "Takes an array of any type and returns rows with each element paired to its index.")
    public <E> List<String> indexSequence(@UdfParameter(value = "s") List<E> x) {
        List<String> result = new ArrayList<>();

        for(int i = 0; i < x.size(); i++) { 
            result.add(x.get(i) + DELIMITER + i);
        }

        return result;
    }

}
```

Notice how:

- The UDTF returns a Java `List`. This is the collection type that ksqlDB expects all tabular functions to return.

> - This UDTF uses Java generics which allow it operate over any [ksqlDB supported types](../../concepts/functions/#supported-types). Use this if you want to express logic that operates uniformly over many different column types. The generic parameter must be declared at the head of the method since you can have multiple signatures, each with a different generic type parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This UDTF uses Java generics, which enable operating over any [ksqlDB supported types](../../concepts/functions/#supported-types). Use this if you want to express logic that operates uniformly over many different column types. The generic parameter must be declared at the head of the method, since you can have multiple signatures, each with a different generic type parameter.
```

    public static Udaf<Integer, List<Integer>, Integer> createUdaf() {
        return new RollingSumUdafImpl();
    }

    private static class RollingSumUdafImpl implements Udaf<Integer, List<Integer>, Integer> {

        private final int CAPACITY = 3;

        @Override
        public List<Integer> initialize() {
            return new LinkedList<Integer>();
        }

        @Override
        public List<Integer> aggregate(Integer newValue, List<Integer> aggregateValue) {
            aggregateValue.add(newValue);

            if (aggregateValue.size() > CAPACITY) {
                aggregateValue = aggregateValue.subList(1, CAPACITY + 1);
            }

            return aggregateValue;
        }

        @Override
        public Integer map(List<Integer> intermediate) {
            Iterator<Integer> it = intermediate.iterator();
            int k = 0;

            while(it.hasNext()) {
                k += it.next();
            }

            return k;
        }

        @Override
        public List<Integer> merge(List<Integer> aggOne, List<Integer> aggTwo) {

>             return aggOne;

Author: Ah, nice catch. I'll do that.

        }
    }
}
```

There are many things to observe in this class:

> - By contrast to scalar and tabular functions, aggregation functions are designated by a static method with the `@UdafFactory` annotation. Because aggregations must implement multiple methods, this helps ksqlDB differentiate aggregations when multiple type signatures are used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Aggregation functions are designated by a static method with the `@UdafFactory` annotation, which differs from scalar and tabular functions. Because aggregations must implement multiple methods, this helps ksqlDB differentiate aggregations when multiple type signatures are used.
```

> - The static factory method needs to either return `Udaf` or `TableUdaf` (in package `io.confluent.ksql.function.udaf`). The former, which is used in this example, can only be used to aggregate streams into tables, and cannot aggregate tables into other tables. To achieve the latter, use the `TableUdaf`, which derives from `Udaf`, and implement the `undo()` method, too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The static factory method must either return `Udaf` or `TableUdaf` in package `io.confluent.ksql.function.udaf`. You can only use the `Udaf` return value, which is used in this example, to aggregate streams into tables. To aggregate tables into other tables, use the `TableUdaf` return value, which derives from `Udaf`, and implement the `undo()` method.
```

> - ksqlDB decouples the internal representation of an aggregate from how it is used in an operation. This is very useful because aggregations can maintain complex state, but expose it in a simpler way in a query. In this example, the internal representation is a `LinkedList`, as indicated by the `initialize()` method. But when ksqlDB interacts with the aggregation value, `map()` is called, which sums the values in the list. The `List` is needed to keep a running history of values, but the summed value is needed for the query itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ksqlDB decouples the internal representation of an aggregate from its use in an operation. This is useful because aggregations can maintain complex state and expose it in a simpler way in a query. In the current example, the internal representation is a `LinkedList`, as indicated by the `initialize()` method. But when ksqlDB interacts with the aggregation value, `map()` is called, which sums the values in the list. The `List` is needed to keep a running history of values, but the summed value is needed for the query itself.
```

- UDAFs must be parameterized with three generic types. In this example, they are `<Integer, List<Integer>, Integer>`. The first parameter represents the type of the column to aggregate over. The second column represents the internal representation of the aggregation, which is established in `initialize()`. The third parameter represents the type that the query interacts with, which is converted by `map()`.

- All types, including inputs, intermediate representations, and final representations, must be [types that ksqlDB supports](../../concepts/functions/#supported-types).

> - The `merge` method controls how two [session windows](../../concepts/time-and-windows-in-ksqldb-queries/#session-window) fuse together when one extends and overlaps another. In this example, the content of the "earlier" aggregate is simply taken. If you are using session windows, you'll want to think through what good merge semantics are for your aggregation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `merge` method controls how two [session windows](../../concepts/time-and-windows-in-ksqldb-queries/#session-window) fuse together when one extends and overlaps another. In this example, the content of the "earlier" aggregate is simply taken. If you're using session windows, consider what good merge semantics are for your aggregation.
```

## Add the uberjar to ksqlDB server

In order for ksqlDB to be able to load your UDFs, they need to be compiled from classes into an uberjar. Run the following command to build an uberjar:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

    container_name: ksqldb-cli
    depends_on:
      - broker
      - ksqldb-server
    entrypoint: /bin/sh
    tty: true
```

Notice that:

- A volume is mounted from the local `extensions` directory (containing your uberjar) to the container `/opt/ksqldb-udfs` directory. The latter can be any directory that you like. This command effectively puts the uberjar on ksqlDB server's file system.

- The environment variable `KSQL_KSQL_EXTENSION_DIR` is configured to the same path that was set for the container in the volume mount. This is the path that ksqlDB will look for UDFs in.

- The environment variable `KSQL_KSQL_FUNCTIONS_FORMULA_BASE_VALUE` is set to `5`. Recall that in the UDF example, the function loads an external parameter named` ksql.functions.formula.base.value`. All `KSQL_` environment variables are converted automatically to server configuration properties, which is where UDF parameters are looked up.

!!! info
    Although this is a single node setup, remember that every node in your ksqlDB cluster needs to have event variable parameters configured since any node can handle any query at any time.

## Invoke the functions

Bring up your stack by running:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

docker-compose up
```

And connect to ksqlDB's server by using its interactive CLI:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

docker exec -it ksqldb-cli ksql http://ksqldb-server:8088
```

Verify that your functions have been loaded by running the following ksqlDB command:

```sql
SHOW FUNCTIONS;
```

You should see a long list of built-in functions, including your own `FORMULA`, `INDEX_SEQ`, and `ROLLING_SUM` (which are listed as `SCALAR`, `TABLE`, and `AGGREGATE` respectivly). If they aren't there, check that your uberjar was correctly mounted into the container. Be sure to check the log files of ksqlDB server, too, using `docker logs -f ksqldb-server`. You should see log lines similar to:

```
[2020-06-24 23:38:10,942] INFO Adding UDAF name=rolling_sum from path=/opt/ksqldb-udfs/example-udfs-0.0.1.jar class=class my.example.RollingSumUdaf (io.confluent.ksql.function.UdafLoader:71)
```

!!! info

>     UDFs are only loaded once as ksqlDB server starts up. ksqlDB does not support hot-reloading UDFs. If you want to change the code of a UDF, you need to create a new uberjar, replace the one that is available to ksqlDB, and restart the server. Keep in mind that in a multi-node setup, different nodes may be running different versions of a UDF at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    UDFs are loaded only once as ksqlDB server starts up. ksqlDB does not support hot-reloading UDFs. If you want to change the code of a UDF, you must create a new uberjar, replace the one that is available to ksqlDB, and restart the server. Keep in mind that in a multi-node setup, different nodes may be running different versions of a UDF at the same time.
```

Reviewer: It's probably not great to have UDF version mismatches across the cluster, should we give guidance about this?

Before you run any queries, be sure to have ksqlDB start all queries from the earliest point in each topic.

```sql
SET 'auto.offset.reset' = 'earliest';
```

### Invoke the scalar function

Inspect the `formula` function by running:

```sql
DESCRIBE FUNCTION formula;
```

> It should output the following. ksqlDB shows all the type signatures that the UDF implements, which in two in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should resemble:
```

```
Name        : FORMULA
Author      : example user
Version     : 1.0.2
Overview    : A custom formula for important business logic.
Type        : SCALAR
Jar         : /opt/ksqldb-udfs/example-udfs-0.0.1.jar
Variations  : 

	Variation   : FORMULA(a DOUBLE, b DOUBLE)
	Returns     : BIGINT
	Description : A special variant of the formula, handling double parameters.

	Variation   : FORMULA(a INT, b INT)
	Returns     : BIGINT
	Description : The standard version of the formula with integer parameters.
```

Create a stream named `s1`:

```sql
CREATE STREAM s1 (
    a VARCHAR KEY,
    b INT,
    c INT
) WITH (
    kafka_topic = 's1',
    partitions = 1,
    value_format = 'avro'
);
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DESCRIBE FUNCTION statement shows all of the type signatures that the UDF implements. For the `formula` function, there are two type signatures.
```

Insert some rows into the stream:

```sql
INSERT INTO s1 (a, b, c) VALUES ('k1', 2, 3);
INSERT INTO s1 (a, b, c) VALUES ('k2', 4, 6);
INSERT INTO s1 (a, b, c) VALUES ('k3', 6, 9);
```

> Execute a push query. Recall what `formula` does. When given two integers, it multiples the together, then adds the value of the parameter `ksql.functions.formula.base.value`, which is set to `5` in your Docker Compose file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execute a push query. The `formula` function multiples two integers and adds the value of the parameter `ksql.functions.formula.base.value`, which is set to `5` in your Docker Compose file:
```

```sql
SELECT a, formula(b, c) AS result FROM s1 EMIT CHANGES;
```

> You should see:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should resemble:
```

```
+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|A                                                             |RESULT                                                        |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|k1                                                            |11                                                            |
|k2                                                            |29                                                            |
|k3                                                            |59                                                            |
```

> Try the other variant which takes two doubles. This implementation takes the ceiling of `a` and `b` before multiplying. Notice how you can use constants instead of column names as arguments to the function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try the other variant of the `formula` function, which takes two doubles. This implementation takes the ceiling of `a` and `b` before multiplying. Notice how you can use constants instead of column names as arguments to the function:
```

```sql
SELECT a, formula(CAST(b AS DOUBLE), 7.3) AS result FROM s1 EMIT CHANGES;
```

> You should see:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should resemble:
```

```
+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|A                                                             |RESULT                                                        |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|k1                                                            |21                                                            |
|k2                                                            |37                                                            |
|k3                                                            |53                                                            |

```

### Invoke the tabular function

Inspect the `index_seq` function by running:

```sql
DESCRIBE FUNCTION index_seq;
```

> It should output the following. Notice how ksqlDB shows that this is a generic function with the type parameter `E`. This means that this UDTF can take a parameter that is an array of any type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should resemble:
```

```
Name        : INDEX_SEQ
Author      : example user
Version     : 1.5.0
Overview    : Disassembles a sequence and produces new elements concatenated with indices.
Type        : TABLE
Jar         : /opt/ksqldb-udfs/example-udfs-0.0.1.jar
Variations  : 

	Variation   : INDEX_SEQ(s ARRAY<E>)
	Returns     : VARCHAR
	Description : Disassembles a sequence and produces new elements concatenated with indices.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The DESCRIBE FUNCTION statement shows that `index_seq`  is a generic function with the type parameter `E`, which means that this UDTF can take a parameter that is an array of any type.

```

Create a stream named `s2`:

```sql
CREATE STREAM s2 (
    a VARCHAR KEY,
    b ARRAY<VARCHAR>
) WITH (
    kafka_topic = 's2',
    partitions = 1,
    value_format = 'avro'
);
```

Insert some rows into the stream:

```sql
INSERT INTO s2 (a, b) VALUES ('k1', ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c']);
INSERT INTO s2 (a, b) VALUES ('k2', ARRAY['d', 'e']);
INSERT INTO s2 (a, b) VALUES ('k3', ARRAY['f']);
```

> Execute a push query. Recall what `index_seq` does. It creates a row per element in an array concatenated with its index position.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execute a push query. The `index_seq` function creates one row for each element in an array, concatenated with the element's index position.
```

```sql
SELECT a, index_seq(b) AS str FROM s2 EMIT CHANGES;
```

> You should see the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should resemble:
```

|A                                                             |STR                                                           |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|k1                                                            |a-0                                                           |
|k1                                                            |b-1                                                           |
|k1                                                            |c-2                                                           |
|k2                                                            |d-0                                                           |
|k2                                                            |e-1                                                           |
|k3                                                            |f-0                                                           |
```

### Invoke the aggregation function

Inspect the `rolling_sum` function by running:

```sql
DESCRIBE FUNCTION rolling_sum;
```

> It should output the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should resemble:
```

```
Name        : ROLLING_SUM
Author      : example user
Version     : 2.0.0
Overview    : Maintains a rolling sum of the last 3 integers of a stream.
Type        : AGGREGATE
Jar         : /opt/ksqldb-udfs/example-udfs-0.0.1.jar
Variations  : 

	Variation   : ROLLING_SUM(val INT)
	Returns     : INT
	Description : Sums the previous 3 integers of a stream, discarding the oldest elements as new ones arrive.
```

Create a stream named `s3`:

```sql
CREATE STREAM s3 (
    a VARCHAR KEY,
    b INT
) WITH (
    kafka_topic = 's3',
    partitions = 1,
    value_format = 'avro'
);
```

Insert some rows into the stream:

```sql
INSERT INTO s3 (a, b) VALUES ('k1', 3);
INSERT INTO s3 (a, b) VALUES ('k1', 5);
INSERT INTO s3 (a, b) VALUES ('k1', 7);
INSERT INTO s3 (a, b) VALUES ('k2', 6);
INSERT INTO s3 (a, b) VALUES ('k2', 2);
```

> Execute a push query. Recall what `rolling_sum` does. It aggregates the previous three elements together, sums them up, and emits their output.

Reviewer: i```suggestion
Execute a push query. The `rolling_sum` function aggregates the previous three elements together, sums them, and emits their output.
```

```sql
SELECT a, rolling_sum(b) AS MOVING_SUM FROM s3 GROUP BY a EMIT CHANGES;
```

> Your output should look like the following. `k1` sums `3`, `5`, and `7` together to get a result of `15`. `k2` sums `6` and `2` together to get a result of `8`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should resemble:
```

```
+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|A                                                             |MOVING_SUM                                                    |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|k1                                                            |15                                                            |
|k2                                                            |8                                                             |
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

`k1` sums `3`, `5`, and `7` together to get a result of `15`. `k2` sums `6` and `2` together to get a result of `8`.

```

> Insert some more rows and shift older elements out of the aggregate:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Insert more rows, to shift older elements out of the aggregate:
```

```sql
INSERT INTO s3 (a, b) VALUES ('k1', 9);
INSERT INTO s3 (a, b) VALUES ('k2', 1);
INSERT INTO s3 (a, b) VALUES ('k2', 6);
```

Run the query again:

```sql
SELECT a, rolling_sum(b) AS MOVING_SUM FROM s3 GROUP BY a EMIT CHANGES;
```

> And you should now see these results. In `k1`, the previous three values are now `5`, `7`, and `9`. In `k2`, the elements are `2`, `1`, and `6`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should resemble:
```

```
+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|A                                                             |MOVING_SUM                                                    |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|k1                                                            |21                                                            |
|k2                                                            |9                                                             |
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

 The output from the `rolling_sum` function has changed. In `k1`, the previous three values are now `5`, `7`, and `9`. In `k2`, the elements are now `2`, `1`, and `6`.
 
```

> ## Working with structs

Reviewer 2: and decimals

> ## Working with structs

Reviewer 2: we can probably omit this for now, or just add a placeholder, but this guide might want to consider covering `@UdfSchemaProvider` as well (and it can just point to examples in the existing code base, like `Abs`

Author: I punked out and just ended up mentioning it. I feel a little bad since it's an important topic. Can you think of a graceful way to introduce it without making the tutorial much more lengthy?

> Using structs in UDFs requires somewhat more ceremony and deserves special attention. Structs are different from the other Java types that ksqlDB interfaces with because their typing is more dynamic. Fields can be added and removed, and their types are inferred on the fly. Because of this dynamism, UDFs need to be more explicit in their type contract with ksqlDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using structs in UDFs requires a more specific type contract with ksqlDB. Structs are different from the other Java types that ksqlDB interfaces with because their typing is more dynamic. Fields can be added and removed, and their types are inferred on the fly. Because of this dynamism, UDFs need to be more explicit in their type contract with ksqlDB.
```

> To demonstrate, create a simple function that maintains simple statistics. This example will use a UDAF, though the concepts are applicable for both UDFs and UDTFs, too. Although the example is a bit fabricated, it is useful because it demonstrates using a struct in all possible positions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, create a simple function that maintains simple statistics. This example uses a UDAF, but the concepts are applicable for UDFs and UDTFs. Although the example is a bit contrived, it is useful because it demonstrates using a struct in all possible positions.
```

            result.put("MIN", min);
            result.put("MAX", max);
            result.put("COUNT", intermediate.getInt64("COUNT"));
            result.put("DIFFERENTIAL", max - min);

            return result;
        }

        @Override
        public Struct merge(Struct aggOne, Struct aggTwo) {
            return aggOne;
        }

        private Long getMin(Struct aggregateValue) {
            Long result = aggregateValue.getInt64("MIN");

            if (result != null) {
                return result;
            } else {
                return Long.MAX_VALUE;
            }
        }

        private Long getMax(Struct aggregateValue) {
            Long result = aggregateValue.getInt64("MAX");

            if (result != null) {
                return result;
            } else {
                return Long.MIN_VALUE;
            }
        }

        private Long getCount(Struct aggregateValue) {
            Long result = aggregateValue.getInt64("COUNT");

            if (result != null) {
                return result;
            } else {
                return 0L;
            }
        }
    }
}
```

There are a few important things to call out in this class:

> - Schemas are declared for the input struct parameter, intermediate aggregation struct value, and output struct value. Becasue each of these three structs are different, they need their own schemas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Schemas are declared for the input struct parameter, intermediate aggregation struct value, and output struct value. These structs have different data, so they each need their own schema.
```

> - Descriptor strings are created for each schema, too. This communicates the underlying types to ksqlDB is a way that its type system can understand. In the future, this may become automated, but it must be maintained today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Descriptor strings are created for each schema, too. This communicates the underlying types to ksqlDB is a way that its type system can understand.
```

> - The schemas, and all the fields within, are declared as optional. ksqlDB does not yet have null constraints, meaning that today, any value can be null. To cope with this, all schemas and field values must be marked as optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The schemas, and all of the contained fields, are declared as optional. ksqlDB doesn't have null constraints, meaning that any value can be null. To handle this, all schemas and field values must be marked as optional.
```

> - Explictly declaring schemas is *only* needed when using structs. But because this example makes use of structs in all possible places (input, intermediate, and output values), schemas are declared for all of them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Explicitly declaring schemas is *only* needed when using structs and decimals. But because this example makes use of structs in all possible places (input, intermediate, and output values), schemas are declared for all of them.
```

```
[2020-06-29 21:10:23,889] WARN Failed to create UDAF name=struct_example, method=createUdaf, class=class my.example.StructExample, path=/opt/ksqldb-udfs/example-udfs-0.0.1.jar (io.confluent.ksql.function.UdafLoader:87)
io.confluent.ksql.util.KsqlException: Must specify 'aggregateSchema' for STRUCT parameter in @UdafFactory.
```

### Invoke the function

Try using the UDAF. Create the stream `s4`:

```sql
CREATE STREAM s4 (
    a VARCHAR KEY,
    b STRUCT<c BIGINT>
) WITH (
    kafka_topic = 's4',
    partitions = 1,
    value_format = 'avro'
);
```

And insert some rows into it:

```sql
INSERT INTO s4 (
    a, b
) VALUES (
    'k1', STRUCT(c := 5)
);

INSERT INTO s4 (
    a, b
) VALUES (
    'k1', STRUCT(c := 3)
);

INSERT INTO s4 (
    a, b
) VALUES (
    'k1', STRUCT(c := 9)
);
```

Remember to have ksqlDB start all queries from the earliest point in each topic:

```sql
SET 'auto.offset.reset' = 'earliest';
```

Execute the following push query:

```sql
SELECT a, stats(b) AS stats FROM s4 GROUP BY a EMIT CHANGES;
```

> It should output the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should resemble:
```

```
+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|A                                                             |STATS                                                         |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|k1                                                            |{MIN=3, MAX=9, COUNT=3, DIFFERENTIAL=6}                       |
```

If you like, you can destructure the output into individual columns. Try following the [query structured data guide](query-structured-data.md).

## Tear down the stack

When you're done, tear down the stack by running:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```
